Good morning, everybody. I am really excited to be here today to talk to you about disposable
shiny apps. I want to start with my goal for today's talk, and that's to convince you that
you should build more shiny apps and then throw them away.
So my name is James Wade. I'm a chemist and data scientist that works in a research and
development environment, and I build shiny apps, a lot of them. I have lived the production
side of shiny apps. In fact, I got to skip out on an app release 30 minutes ago, attending
the keynote instead. And I also have been maintaining this two-year-old shiny app that
has more than 100 users. It has tests, CICD pipelines, a backlog that I feel guilty about
not getting to, and I really have learned both the power but also the pain that these
long-living apps can yield. I've also increasingly come to appreciate the disposable side. I
build apps for a single meeting, they live for an hour and die gracefully, or more likely
just live on posit connect for nobody to pay attention to them, and I've really come to
appreciate the power of immediacy. Something else about me is I have a common frustration
giving presentations that I imagine many of you have come across as well. Let's say you've
been asked to give an important update to some high-level stakeholders, you've crafted
your narrative, you've spent time to polish your slides, make them beautiful, you're telling
your story, and thankfully the stakeholders there are paying attention. Maybe one of them
unmutes, asks you on a data slide, hmm, that's really interesting, but what if we looked
at the data this way? Your answer, if you haven't thought of that, is I'll have to get
back to you. The conversation stops, the momentum is lost. What you're often building, what
I am often building in my presentations is something like a painting that might live
in an art gallery. I'm not an artist, but please bear with me for the analogy here.
The intention is for the audience to listen, to hear a message, and maybe take an action
from that, but it's very passive in nature. Something else about me is I have young kids,
so I end up spending a lot of time in children's museums, and if you've never been to these
or if it's been a while, these are glorified playgrounds, but what I love about them is
they have exhibits that invite the children and sometimes parents to interact, play, sometimes
even break the exhibits that are inside of them. Hopefully you get the analogy here.
I want you to answer for yourself what the goal of your given presentation might be.
Do you want that active engagement? Now, maybe you're thinking this would be great. I'd love
to have time to go build some of these more apps, and you might be falling into one of
two traps. The first is the don't build it trap. It's too much effort just for one meeting
for you to go and build this out. We default going back to slides because the development
hill feels just a bit too steep. Maybe you go on the other side. Maybe you know yourself
well enough that if you start building an app, you're not going to stop. Maybe you think
it has to be production grade. Maybe you're going to overengineer a complex solution for
really what should be a simple app. The result of both of these is death by PowerPoint.
I want to challenge you to think with a new mindset, this disposable app. What if building
an app for a single meeting was just as easy as making a slide deck? The value of this
application is for its immediate impact, not for its longevity. It's a communication artifact,
a communication tool, not a production system. Again, it's designed to be thrown away.
So how do we go about building one of these? I'll do this through an example. I'll walk
through a critical tool at least in my life, which is the twin potty trading command center.
One thing to consider for these applications is that it's becoming much easier to build
them because of a paradigm shift that all of you are familiar with. This development
hill isn't as steep as it used to be, largely because of vibe coding. And what I mean this
more broadly of the coding AI assistance that can dramatically accelerate the time it takes
to get to a working application. We can translate our prompts directly into functional shiny
code. When we're doing this, critically for a disposable
app, what you're going to want to do is start with one question, one intent. A disposable
app should do one thing and probably only one thing well. So going back to the potty
training command center, my house has twin toddlers in it that are currently going through
potty training. I have a four-year-old, I have four cats and a lot of chaos. My house
is never quiet. And one of the questions we had was how do we know if we're making progress
with our potty training? So the important stakeholders here are myself and my wife.
We're wanting realtime insights and encouragement to think that we're headed in the right direction
with this. So here is the app itself. It has the ability to track how each of the twins
are doing. It has a parental sanity meter as part of it. You can interact with this.
Most importantly is the chat bot that gives us that encouragement. In case you have kids
that are potty training age, we're using oh, crap potty training. I don't know if it's
any good because I don't know if we're going to succeed at this. But one of the things
it did say was don't tell anybody when you're going to potty train your kids. So I guess
I made a bit of a mistake there. If I were giving this talk two years ago, what I would
have done, say, the old way of making this, I would have started by defining the question,
the same step you already saw. I would have encouraged you to go get a template, maybe
sketch out a UI, start building the UI itself, maybe writing some server logic and then going
through a couple of iterations of styling and polishing. It's not drastically long that
would have taken me. I've built a lot of these and I could probably build something reasonable
in a couple of hours. But the new way of doing this, we can change this workflow. We're going
to define the question, but we can go and start writing a prompt that we can use with
one of these coding assistants. I'll go through the other steps in a moment, but I time boxed
myself in the app that you saw to 15 minutes. It took 12 minutes in total to get to the
application that you saw. That is not something to look at me and be like, wow, he's good
at that. It's a testament to the capabilities that are now possible. More on that in a moment.
So let's talk about this. What does a clear prompt mean? This is not a talk on prompt
engineering. I'm not the expert on that. But I can give you some tips and tricks that I
have found for this. Really what you're wanting to do is explain to a colleague the application
that you would want. The clearer you are about that, thinking of things such as a clear objective,
tracking the twin potty training progress. Maybe some features, a success rate, predictions,
the components that you already saw. Specifically calling out tools that you want to use. Asking
for BS lib. I wanted a sidebar layout. And having enough context that the application
is actually going to be recognizable. So I let it know that my twins' names are Henry
and Penelope. The better the prompt, the more time you're going to be saving yourself later
on. Now, just to show you this, this is what the prompt actually looks like. I'm not going
to read all the way through this. That's not really the point here. I want you to get a
sense of how much information is required to get something useful out of this. So, again,
this took about 12 minutes for me to go and make the app that you saw. And let's think
of why that actually worked well. I'm not some mystical 10X engineer, if any of you
were at the keynote a few moments ago. What I'm using is a lot of other infrastructure
and tools around me. I opened up Positron. I'm using Positron Assistant. I loaded in
the Shiny extension. I'm using a frontier model, in this case, CloudSonic 4. I'm styling
it with brand.yaml, which you'll hear about later in this session. And I'm deploying it
to PositConnect. I'm not even mentioning all the different packages that I'm also,
the open source packages that I'm using that's helping accelerate this even further. So,
it's not really magic, despite what I have on the slide here that we're talking about.
But you can take this short paragraph or so, and if you're feeling particularly lazy like
I am at times, you can just talk and have it transcribe what you're having to say. But,
again, including those details that are going to increase the likelihood of a success on
the first couple of iterations of an app. You really do need to watch this happening.
Most of the vibe coding, so to speak, that I've been doing has been with Cloud Code.
And I find it particularly helpful to read exactly what it's telling me back it's going
through. I can see it going down weird avenues, and I can stop it going through that.
What you can see using these capabilities is you already saw the UI components. You
see a UI structure using Shiny and BASelib. It did a realistic data simulation. It had
interactive visuals. I didn't ask for interactive visuals, but it gave me those. It uses Elmer
in Shiny chat as part of this. Now, I should mention that it didn't actually work the first
time it came out. There was an error. But all I did was copy that error, paste it in,
and a couple of iterations, I think it actually took three, I had something that was workable
for me. And now that I know about the fix slash command, it would have been even faster
for me to go through that. So, pretty often you're going to be finding
yourself having to fix some of these broken pieces that come along the way. Maybe you
see a style or layout that you don't particularly like. Maybe you need to add in some of your
own data. But sometimes I actually see the app comes up and it isn't answering the question
that I started off with. Maybe it was poorly posed or isn't actually going to be useful
for the audience that I want to consume this information. And in that case, maybe I'll
start again or maybe I'll just throw it away. Again, I've invested only 15 minutes. I spent
a lot more time on that adjusting figure layouts in my presentations.
Another important key to success here is having a push button deployment environment. The
barrier to getting somebody your tool that you've created, if you want it to be disposable,
needs to be just as easy as that initial app creation process that you went through. For
me, it's Posit Connect. I really appreciate the ability to just push the magic button
and all of a sudden I now have an app that others can interact with.
Okay. So you've heard this so far, but maybe you're thinking that this isn't exactly something
that's going to be for you. I want to take a couple of moments to talk through some of
the possible objections that you might have in your head as part of this.
The first of which is who's going to support this? In my role, I'm often asked about things
like life cycle management, support structures. Maybe the IT department is going to call me
up and ask, what's the maintenance plan for this app? Very simple. Nobody is going to
support this. That's the entire point of it. You don't need a maintenance crew for a whiteboard
drawing. You just erase it. We don't have support structures for our PowerPoint slides.
If it only took 15 minutes to build and we need it again, we can just go and rebuild
it. The second objection, isn't this in danger
of just creating a bunch of app sprawl? If any of you have a push button deployment environment
like I've described, it's probably a mess. I actually think that's a sign of success.
It means people are using it and taking advantage of it. So, yes, I do think that you're going
to be in danger of app sprawl. And to be honest, I'm not the right person to ask about
this because I've been accused of being an app hoarder myself. I think the value there
is rather than worry about having the making sure that only apps that should live the test
of time will make it to this deployment environment is to rather focus on curation. And most likely
you're not even going to be focused on surfacing something that you could end up throwing away.
The key distinction here is the role that this disposable app is going to play. These
are communication artifacts, not an underlying production system. You must be committed to
if you're going to create this, if you're going to acknowledge that it can die, you
have to be willing to let it do so. Third objection, this sounds like more work.
Is it really faster than making slides? Let's think about what I did for this presentation.
I realized early in some of the speaker coaching sessions that I was definitely obligated to
build an app if I'm talking about how easy it is to go and build these. And so what I
had to do is I had to create these slides and I created an app. Have I now just created
something that's going to be more work for all of you? Maybe. But I would argue that
the impact to effort ratio that you have here is much higher. If that app happens to land,
that's going to have a much more profound impact on your audience than if you simply
had spent that time making the slides instead. I've noticed that PowerPoint for me can be
an infinite time paradox where I just will spend way too much time tweaking where all
the layouts happen to go. Actually, that's when this presentation was built in Cordo,
which actually prevents me from being able to do that since it's all specified in code.
The other thing to acknowledge is it's way more fun to build a shiny app than it is to
put a presentation together. I imagine that many of you are going to agree with that as
well. So I want to go back to really what I was talking about at the beginning here
of my challenge to all of you of wanting to build more shiny apps. This is going to require
a mindset shift. The barriers to creating these apps are gone. We have more of these
tools. The challenge that we have is to rethink how we can use these applications in a disposable
manner. So my challenge to all of you is the next time that you have a presentation,
I'm going to challenge you to open up RStudio or Positron before you open PowerPoint and
to go and build something that's disposable. Thank you.
Thank you, James. We have time for a few questions here. First, how do you handle user input?
For example, if you have a dashboard and the value is wrong but the user wants to edit
to fix the data somehow?
That's a great question. I think in that case, this is a danger zone for some of these disposable
apps of where you're wanting to take user feedback and refine it. I think the challenge
that I would have there is see if the point of the app is not to hand somebody a tool.
Again, it's to hand somebody that communication piece. And so a couple of back and forths
I think are fine. But I actually would resist the urge to go and do interface refinement
unless you have achieved likely the outcome of the meeting and now they're inspired to
have something long term. So you might end up creating more work for yourself in the
long run by having these. But that just means more shiny apps for the world.
For shiny apps used in meetings, what do you do to prevent in-meeting crashes that can
halt momentum?
If anybody knows how to make the live demos go well, I would love the advice on that.
For the most part, what I had here, that was just a recorded animation of the app in action.
That's one way that you could accomplish something like this. But if the app is crashing
on you repeatedly, most likely you've tried to create something that's too complex. That's
the benefit of actually having that deployment environment. It's rare if I have a simple
app that it will end up crashing because I'm not going to build out external data connections
or other dependencies that can have the bugaboos that will face true production deployments.
How did you prepare your organization for this going from PowerPoint slides to the shiny?
Do you see meetings running more successfully now?
I would say that I have not spread this message adequately well in my own company. But people
like looking at something other than PowerPoint. I imagine many of you like looking at something
other than slides. And so having that interactivity can be something that's really pleasant.
One of the signs of success I would have, I would say for this, is if you are sending
out an app and you're getting questions of people using that, potentially even instead
of listening to your talk. Sometimes that actually is the end goal of I want somebody
to just start using something. It's similar in my mind to how when I'm talking to somebody
about whether they should use AI-based coding assistance, nothing that I say is usually
going to convince them to go do it. They just need to experience that sort of wow factor
on their own. So same thing with the power of interactivity.
Sure. How do you think about sharing disposable apps in your org? For example, you mentioned
Posit Connect. If someone doesn't have an account but they may need to view an app one
time just quickly, how do you handle that situation?
Have lots of licenses. In practice, I think that most disposable shiny apps, this one
would not be a great example because it has a chat bot. But that likely would be a great
example for Shiny Live, where you could have it so that you could just send it to somebody.
If anybody here works for Microsoft, I do have a complaint that you can't paste a Shiny
Live app into a Teams because the link is too long. So if anybody wants to fix that,
I'd be really happy about it. So for presentations, you can save a PDF copy,
but if you delete a shiny app, then no one else can access it. Is it worth it to have
that workflow knowing that you can't save and share in that same way?
Yeah. Good question. I mean, I think you could save some of the artifacts. You don't
literally have to delete it, although I did. I didn't go to the final animation. I should
have deleted this application in style. But I think in those cases, you are looking for
more inspiration or action as the intent of that communication artifact. But that is a
good point. That certainly is a downside. My museum analogy that I spoke about before,
by the way, I think that I don't want to say that you only should be focused on building
the children's museum equivalent. There are cases where you just want the audience to
absorb it and listen. And similarly with these disposable apps, I think that's a good fit
for where if they get the message, they no longer need the app, hopefully.
Perfect. Thank you, James.